And welcome back we're back to our critical render path diagram.
It's slowly started to make sense.
We've talked about a shemale and CSSA.
Now we're going to talk a little bit about javascript and before he gets into the rendered tree now
of a shemale and CSSA I think javascript is probably the worse because it can access and change both
the DOM and the CSSA.
This means that once a script tag NDA shemale is discovered the DOM construction is paused and the script
is requested from the server.
So no matter what we're doing in the mail Hoopes we see a script file we need to go requested once the
script is loaded.
It can't be executed before all the SS is fast as well.
And the C Ss Dom is constructed
after the CEA says document object model is constructed.
Javascript is executed and yes as you can imagine Javascript can and may access the Dom as well as the
CSSA dam and it can alter it.
And only once that is done can the page finally be rendered by going to the rendered tree layout and
paint.
And that's why we called javascript a parser blocking remember'd the alert code that we did before where
we had a script tag with alert and it just completely blocked the page.
Now with javascript there's a few things that we can do to optimize it.
Let's start with the first one.
Loading scripts asynchronously to help with that.
Have a nice little diagram for us.
You may have seen the most common way of having script tags which is.
Yep just script when the Schmall starts reading.
Which means parsing the file it's going to encounter a script tech and this script tag needs to get
downloaded which blocks see all parsing.
It also needs to get executed which blocks the stream of parsing and then finally once that's done the
Schimmel is back to being parsed.
Now we have two new properties that we can add to our script tags to alter this behavior and the first
one is async.
So loading scripts asynchronously and that's right.
It's super simple.
All we do is add this attribute to our script X by using async we can tell the browser go ahead and
download the javascript file with another thread.
Think of a thread as a person doing work he or she can only do one thing at a time.
With async we can say hey to another worker while I'm working on this a parsing can you go download
the javascript file and this javascript file is now downloading on a low priority but it doesn't block
the rest of the page loading and as soon as it's finished downloading it will execute.
So that part it's still blocking the Shyamal parsing.
Now there's a catch to this.
This means that it can execute at any time which listed two obvious issues.
First that excede execute long after the page actually loads.
So for example for lying on this async script to do something with our user experience then we may give
our user a sub optimal experience.
Second if it happens to execute before the page finishes loading We can't really predict if we need
access to the dom or some of the elements.
If it starts doing some DOM manipulation without the actual Dom being there well we might get some errors.
So here's the rule with async for scripts.
Add them to anything that doesn't affect the dom or the CSSA document object model.
So async should be used for pretty much all external scripts that require no knowledge of our code and
are not really essential to our user experience.
You can think of this as maybe Google Analytics scripts or tracking scripts.
Now there is a second option and again going back to our point here.
The other option with javascript is that we can defer loading of scripts and defer loading of scripts.
Again is simple with this one attribute defer is very similar to async in that it will not block loading
of our page.
However it will wait to execute until after all has been parsed and we will execute in order of appearance.
As you can see here it's going to wait until a shemale is completely parsed and then start executing.
Now this is really really good option for scripts that will act on the rendered tree or the dom but
they're also not important to loading Maybe the above the fold content.
So here's my rule for when to use async and defer.
If the core functionality requires javascript while async is best if core functionality does not require
javascript then javascript should be deferred outside of the critical render path.
Your critical scripts your app script should be here.
Third party scripts that don't affect the DOM.
She'll be here and any perhaps third party scripts that aren't that important aren't above the fold.
Should use differe.
Let's look at the other options.
We can minimize Dohm manipulations and avoid long running Javascript.
So let's use an example here to demonstrate this.
We've upgraded our site a little bit.
We've added a button with red font this time and a cute little dot picture and the file here again.
It's a pretty basic file we have a new image tag here now and we have a couple of scripts.
And don't worry I'll give you access to all these files at the end of the section so you can start practicing
as well.
Now in here in the script tags you see we have a few things one that we're going to talk about is the
first one which is an inline script.
And this script acts simply grabs the button on our page and adds the style color red Let's see what
happens here.
When I refresh the page and take a look at the button over here as I'm refreshing the too hard refresh.
There you are.
You see that the button is always read
and no point if I remove this let's say this is just going to be the default which is black because
javascript gets executed before the render tree.
Just like here if we remember our diagram wants our javascript is loaded.
It's going to read the browsers going to read inside and see if it needs to load any more things.
So once again you can imagine here if you're modifying the dom or changing the styles that's just extra
work that the browser has to do to render.
Let's take a look at these other script files that I have here.
This is the first script file which about it a couple of event listeners to one is Dom content loaded
and the other one is load and.
I'll explain what those do in a bit and then finally we have this is script.
For now let's just look at this script file.
I'm going to comment out the script 2 and 3 save and I'm willing to open up the developer tab here and
I'm going to refresh
Let's see what just happened here.
We have this script to one Dom fully loaded and parsed and then finally all resources finished loading.
If we look at our file we called the secret file what happened here first console log.
This is script one was called first before Dom Cantet was loaded before the page was loaded so the browser
checks the scripts to make sure that it has everything it needs to build the page.
And if we open up the Network tab here and I refresh again I see that the blue line which is over here
is the DOM content loaded which took 14 milliseconds quite fast and that says that the document object
model has been loaded.
And then finally load which is the red line here says that all the content on the page including this
image has been loaded so because of the way the critical render path works.
What happens is that we're reading the javascript file building the DOM tree.
Finally finished building it and then finally finished loading all the scripts or all the files including
the image.
So if we go to our script to and script three as can see seen very simple just console logs.
If I add them into our page and I refresh this go to the console and we see that we have 1 2 three down
fully loaded and parsed all resources finished loading and just for fun here let's add an async attribute
to script to.
If I refresh look at that async or asynchronously downloaded script to now loads after the DOM is fully
loaded because it's not blocking yet anymore.
Very very cool.
All right.
The last thing I'm going to show you is the avoid long running Javascript and this is something that
we'll talk more about in part two when we talk about optimizing code.
I do want to show you one point if we go back to our code here.
I have a nother script and this script simply adds an event Lessner click that has an alert stop click
clicking be and let me show you why.
Long running Javascript files or along executing javascript files are not a good idea.
You see right now this page is not too much loading by just move it up a bit so I can scroll here.
That's great.
If I click on here
oh and I should remove the first one because I've complained that button already has been declared.
If I refresh here see that the bunds not read any more.
If I click I can't do anything anymore.
I can't click any more.
I can scroll any more.
The page is completely blocked because this javascript code is running.
So if you have javascript code that is executing for a long time while you have pretty poor user experience
because it feels all blocked and Janke all right there you have it.
We now know how the Shyamal domus control is constructed.
We know how the CSSA object model is constructed.
We know how javascript is read and executed.
We know when Dom content is loaded we can finally do some other things and finally we know that when
the web page is completely loaded we get that load event.
So the next video.
Let's talk about these last few steps and get into some exercises.
I'll see on that one.
Bye.